Chapter/methodology#martin (#25)
ysndr/MSc-Thesis: chapter/methodology.md

# Design implementation of NLS

This chapter guides through the various steps and components of the Nickel Language Server (NLS).

> Being written in the same language (Rust[@rust]) as the Nickel interpreter allows NLS to integrate existing components for language analysis.

Author: Working on it.
How to structure the intorduction then instead if forward refs are also discouraged?

Aiming for an abstract interface, NLS defines its own data structure underpinning all higher level LSP interactions.
[Section @sec:linearization] will introduce this `linearization` data structure and explain how NLS bridges the gap between the explicitly handled Nickel AST towards the abstract linearization.
Finally, the implementation of current LSP features is discussed in [@sec:lsp-server].

## Illustrative example

The example [@lst:nickel-complete-example] shows an illustrative high level configuration of a server.
Throughout this chapter, different sections about the NSL implementation will refer back to this example.

> ```{.nickel #lst:nickel-complete-example caption="Nickel example with most features shown"}

Author: https://github.com/ysndr/MSc-Thesis/pull/25/files#r826492722

let Port | doc "A contract for a port number" =
  contracts.from_predicate (fun value =>
    builtins.is_num value &&
    value % 1 == 0 &&
    value >= 0 &&
    value <= 65535) in

let Container = {
  image | Str,
  ports | List Port,
} in

let NobernetesConfig = {
  apiVersion | Str,
  metadata.name | Str,
  replicas | nums.PosNat
           | doc "The number of replicas"
           | default = 1,
  containers | { _ : Container },

} in

let name_ = "myApp" in

let metadata_ = {
    name = name_,
} in

let webContainer = fun image => {
  image = image,
  ports = [ 80, 443 ],
} in

let image = "k8s.gcr.io/%{name_}" in

{
  apiVersion = "1.1.0",
  metadata = metadata_,
  replicas = 3,
  containers = {
    "main container" = webContainer image
  }
} | NobernetesConfig

```

## Linearization

> The focus of the NLS as presented in this work is to implement a working language server with a comprehensive feature set.

Author: ```suggestion
The focus of the NLS as presented in this work is to implement foundational set of LSP features as described in [@sec:capability].
In order to process these capabilities efficiently, NLS needs to store more information than what is originally present in a Nickel AST (cf. [@sec:nickel-ast]), such as information about references and types.
```

> To answer requests, NLS needs to store more information than what is originally present in a Nickel AST such as information about references and types.

Author: ```suggestion
To answer requests, NLS needs to store more information than what is originally present in a Nickel AST (cf. [@sec:nickel-ast]) such as information about references and types.
```

> Apart from missing data, an AST is not optimized for quick random access of nodes based on their position, which is a crucial operation for a language server.

Author: As in "why is it 'a crucial operation'" i assume

> Apart from missing data, an AST is not optimized for quick random access of nodes based on their position, which is a crucial operation for a language server.

Author: ```suggestion
While these can be deduced from the AST lazily, it would require the repeated traversal of arbitrarily large tree with an associated cost to performance.
Therefore as hinted in [@sec:code-analysis], optimization is directed to efficient lookup from a pre-processed report.
Since most LSP commands refer to code positions, the intermediate structure must allow efficient lookup of analysis results based on positions.

```

To that end NLS introduces an auxiliary data structure, the *linearization*, which is derived from the AST.
It represents the original data linearly, performs an enrichment of the AST nodes and provides greater decoupling of the LSP functions from the implemented language.
[Section @sec:transfer-from-ast] details the process of transforming the AST to a linearization.
After NLS parsed a Nickel source files to an AST it starts to fill the linearization, which is in a *building* state during this phase.
For reasons detailed in [@sec:post-processing], the linearization needs to be post-processed, yielding a *completed* state.
The completed linearization acts as the basis to handle all supported LSP requests as explained in [@sec:lsp-server].
[Section @sec:resolving-elements] explains how a completed linearization is accessed efficiently.

> Advanced LSP implementations sometimes employ so-called incremental parsing, which allows updating only the relevant parts of an AST (and, in case of NLS, the derived linearization) upon small changes in the source.

Author: Touching on this in #9 / #16

However, an incremental LSP is not trivial to implement.
For once, NLS would not be able to leverage existing components from the existing Nickel implementation (most notably, the parser).
Parts of the nickel runtime, such as the typechecker, would need to be adapted or even reimplemented to work incrementally too.
Considering the scope of this thesis, the presented approach performs a complete analysis on every update to the source file.
The typical size of Nickel projects is assumed to remain small for quite some time, giving reasonable performance in practice.
Incremental parsing, type-checking and analysis can still be implemented as a second step in the future after gathering more usage data once nickel and the NLS enjoy greater adoption.

<!-- TODO mention lsif here? -->

### States

> At its core the linearization in either state is represented by an array of `LinearizationItem`s which are derived from AST nodes during the linearization process.

Author: introduced in the architecture section: https://github.com/ysndr/MSc-Thesis/pull/25/files#r831289826

However, the exact structure of that array differs as an effect of the post-processing.

`LinearizationItem`s maintain the position of their AST counterpart as well as its type.
Unlike in the AST ([sec:meta-information]), *metadata* is directly associated with the element.
Further deviating from the AST representation, the *type* of the node and its *kind* are tracked separately.
The latter is used to represent a usage graph on top of the linear structure.
It distinguishes between declarations (`let` bindings, function parameters, records) and variable usages.

> Any other kind of structure, for instance, primitive values (Strings, numbers, boolean, enumerations), is recorded as `Structure`.

Author: Yes, see architecture section

> To separate the phases of the elaboration of the linearization in a type-safe way, the implementation is based on type-states[@typestate].

Author: I.e. in the background or earlier in this chapter as part of "implementatation language"?

> To separate the phases of the elaboration of the linearization in a type-safe way, the implementation is based on type-states[@typestate].

Author: - [x] done in section "implementatation language"

Type-states were chosen over an enumeration based approach for the additional flexibility they provide to build a generic interface.

> Thanks to the generic interface, the adaptions to Nickel to integrate NLS are expected to have almost no influence on the runtime performance of the language in an optimized build.

Author: https://github.com/ysndr/MSc-Thesis/pull/25/files#r831384104

Type definitions of the `Linearization` as well as its type-states `Building` and `Completed` are listed in [@lst:nickel-definition-lineatization;@lst:nls-definition-building-type;@lst:nls-definition-completed-type].
Note that only the former is defined as part of the Nickel libraries, the latter are specific implementations for NLS.

```{.rust #lst:nickel-definition-lineatization caption="Definition of Linearization structure"}
pub trait LinearizationState {}

pub struct Linearization<S: LinearizationState> {
    pub state: S,
}
```

```{.rust #lst:nls-definition-building-type caption="Type Definition of Building state"}
pub struct Building {
    pub linearization: Vec<LinearizationItem<Unresolved>>,
    pub scope: HashMap<Vec<ScopeId>, Vec<ID>>,
}
impl LinearizationState for Building {}
```

```{.rust #lst:nls-definition-completed-type caption="Type Definition of Completed state" }
pub struct Completed {
    pub linearization: Vec<LinearizationItem<Resolved>>,
    scope: HashMap<Vec<ScopeId>, Vec<ID>>,
    id_to_index: HashMap<ID, usize>,
}
impl LinearizationState for Completed {}
```

### Transfer from AST

> The NLS project aims to present a transferable architecture that can be adapted for future languages.

Author: ```suggestion
The NLS project aims to present a transferable architecture that can be adapted for future languages as elaborated in [@sec:generalizability].
```

Consequently, NLS faces the challenge of satisfying multiple goals

1. To keep up with the frequent changes to the Nickel language and ensure compatibility at minimal cost, NLS needs to *integrate critical functions* of Nickel's runtime
2. Adaptions to Nickel to accommodate the language server should be minimal not obstruct its development and *maintain performance of the runtime*.
<!-- what is more? -->

To accommodate these goals NLS comprises three different parts as shown in [@fig:nls-nickel-structure].

> The `Linearizer` trait 

Author: This is not quite rendered as a bullet list (definition list to be exact).
I chose this style as a middle ground between bullet list and entire prosa as it gives a bit more structure to the block

    - its assigned value

Records
  ~ remain similar to their AST representation.
    The `Record` variant simply maps the record's field names to the linked `RecordField`

Record fields
  ~ are represented as `RecordField` kinds and store:
    
    - the same data as for identifiers (and, in particular, tracks its usages)
    - a link to the parent `Record`
    - a link to the value of the field

Variable usages
  ~ can be in three different states. 
  
    1. `Usage`s that can not (yet) be mapped to a declaration are tagged `Unbound`
    2. A `Resolved` usage introduces a back-link to the complementary `Declaration`
    3. For record destructuring resolution of the name might need to be `Deferred` to the post-processing as discussed in [@sec:variable-usage-and-static-record-access].

Other nodes
  ~ of the AST that do not participate in the usage graph, are linearized as `Structure` -- A wildcard variant with no associated data.

<!-- TODO: Add graphics -->

#### Scopes

<!-- TODO: how to explain scopes -->

The Nickel language implements lexical scopes with name shadowing.

1. A name can only be referred to after it has been defined
2. A name can be redefined locally

> An AST inherently supports this logic.

Author: ```suggestion
An AST inherently supports this logic due to its hierarchical structure.
```

Elaboration follows in next two sentences

A variable reference always refers to the closest parent node defining the name and scopes are naturally separated using branching.
Each branch of a node represents a sub-scope of its parent, i.e., new declarations made in one branch are not visible in the other.

> When eliminating the tree structure, scopes have to be maintained in order to provide auto-completion of identifiers and list symbol names based on their scope as context.

Author: Auto completion as a concept is defined in the background as part of LSP operations

I see how this would also be part of the "objectives" section

### Flexibility

The Nickel Language just faced its initial release so changes and additions to the language are inevitable.
Since, NLS is expressed as the official tooling solution for the language, it has to be able to keep up with Nickel's development.
Therefore, the architecture needs to be flexible and simple enough to accommodate changes to the language's structure while remaining the server's capabilities and requiring little changes to the language core.
Likewise, extending the capabilities of the server should be simple enough and designed such future developers are able to pick up the work on NLS.

### Generalizability

In the interest of the academic audience and future developers of language servers, this thesis aims to present a reusable solution.
The implementation of NLS as examined in this thesis should act as an implementation example that can be applied to other, similar languages.
As a result the requirements on the language and its implementation should be minimal.
Also, the Language servers should not depend on the implementation of Nickel (e.g. types) too deeply.

## Illustrative example

> The example [@lst:nickel-complete-example] shows an illustrative high level configuration of a server.

Author: ```suggestion
The example [@lst:nickel-complete-example] shows an illustrative high level configuration of a server.
The configuration is constrained by the `NobernetesConfig` contract.
The contract defines required fields and field types.
Notably, the fields `containers` and `replicas` are themselves constrained by contracts.
The `Port` contract is a logical contract that ensures the value is in the range of valid port numbers.
The example also shows different ways of declaring types (i.e. constraining record value types), string interpolation, as well as the usage of let bindings with standard types.

```

There are two groups of vertices in such a graph.
**Declarations** are nodes that introduce an identifier, and can be referred to by a set of nodes.
Referral is represented by **Usage** nodes.

During the linearization process this graphical model is embedded into the items of the linearization.
Hence, each `LinearizationItem` is associated with a kind representing the item's role in the graph (see: [@lst:nls-termkind-definition]).

```{.rust #lst:nls-termkind-definition caption="Definition of a linearization items TermKind"}
pub enum TermKind {
    Declaration(Ident, Vec<ID>, ValueState),
    Record(HashMap<Ident, ID>),
    RecordField {
        ident: Ident,
        record: ID,
        usages: Vec<ID>,
        value: ValueState,
    },

    Usage(UsageState),

    Structure,
}

pub enum UsageState {
    Unbound,
    Resolved(ID),
    Deferred { parent: ID, child: Ident },
}

pub enum ValueState {
    Unknown,
    Known(ID),
}
```

Variable bindings and function arguments
  ~ are linearized using the `Declaration` variant which holds

    - the bound identifier
    - a list of `ID`s corresponding to its `Usage`s.

>     - its assigned value

Author: The bullet points here add more clarity than a long or multiple sentences I would argue.
Is it still preferable to write these out?

When eliminating the tree structure, scopes have to be maintained in order to provide auto-completion of identifiers and list symbol names based on their scope as context.
Since the bare linear data structure cannot be used to deduce a scope, related metadata has to be tracked separately.
The language server maintains a register for identifiers defined in every scope.
This register allows NLS to resolve possible completion targets as detailed in [@sec:resolving-by-scope].

The globally tracked scope metadata maps `ScopeId`s to a list of identifiers defined in the scope.
An instance of the linearizer is valid for a single scope and hence corresponds to a unique `ScopeId`.
Every item generated by the same linearizer is associated with the `ScopeId` of the instance.
A scope branch during the traversal of the AST is indicated through the `Linearizer::scope()` method.
The `Linearizer::scope()` method creates a new linearizer instance with a new `ScopeId`.
A `ScopeId` in turn is a "scope path", a list of path elements where the prefix is equal to the parent scope's `ScopeId`.
[Listing @lst:nickel-scope-example] shows the scopes for a simple expression in Nickel explictly.

> ```{.nickel #lst:nickel-scope-example caption="Explicit display of Nickel scopes"}
> ---------------------------------------------+/1
>                                              |
> let record                                   |
>   = { -------------------------------+ /1/1  |
>                                      |       |
>     key1 = "value", -------- /1/1/1  |       |
>     key2 = 123, ------------ /1/1/2  |       |
>                                      |       |
>   }----------------------------------+       |
>   in record ------------------------/1/2     |
>                                              |
> ---------------------------------------------+
> ```

Author: ```suggestion
```{.nickel #lst:nickel-scope-example caption="Explicit display of Nickel scopes"}
---------------------------------------------+ /1
                                             |
let record                                   |
  = { -------------------------------+ /1/1  |
                                     |       |
    key1 = "value", -------- /1/1/1  |       |
    key2 = 123, ------------ /1/1/2  |       |
                                     |       |
  } ---------------------------------+       |
  in record -------------------------- /1/2  |
                                             |
---------------------------------------------+
```
```

NLS first attempts to resolve an item for the requested position using the cached linearization.
Depending on the command the item must be either a `Usage` or `Declaration`/`RecordField`.
Given the item is of the correct kind, the language server looks up the referenced declaration or associated usages respectively.
The stored position of each item is encoded in the LSP defined format and sent to the client.
In short, usage graph queries perform two lookups to the linearization.
One for the requested element and a second one to retrieve the linked item.

#### Completion

Item completion makes use of the scope identifiers attached to each item.
Since Nickel implements lexical scopes, all declarations made in parent scopes can be a reference.
If two declarations use the same identifier, Nickel applies variable shadowing to refer to the most recent declaration, i.e., the declaration with the deepest applicable scope.
NLS uses scope identifiers which represent scope depth as described in [@sec:scopes] to retrieve symbol names for a reference scope using the method described in [@sec:resolving-by-scope].

> The current scope taken as reference is derived from the item at cursor position.

Author: Make use of example code

# Design implementation of NLS

This chapter guides through the components of the Nickel Language Server (NLS) as well as the implementation details of the source code analysis and information querying.
Aiming for an abstract interface, NLS defines its own data structure underpinning all higher level LSP interactions.

> [Section @sec:linearization] will introduce this `linearization` data structure and explain how NLS bridges the gap between the explicitly handled Nickel AST towards the abstract linearization.

Author: ```suggestion
[Section @sec:linearization] will introduce this linearization data structure and explain how NLS bridges the gap from the explicitly handled Nickel AST.
```

Every item generated by the same linearizer is associated with the `ScopeId` of the instance.
A scope branch during the traversal of the AST is indicated through the `Linearizer::scope()` method.
The `Linearizer::scope()` method creates a new linearizer instance with a new `ScopeId`.
A `ScopeId` in turn is a "scope path", a list of path elements where the prefix is equal to the parent scope's `ScopeId`.
[Listing @lst:nickel-scope-example] shows the scopes for a simple expression in Nickel explictly.

```{.nickel #lst:nickel-scope-example caption="Explicit display of Nickel scopes"}
---------------------------------------------+ /1
                                             |
let record                                   |
  = { -------------------------------+ /1/1  |
                                     |       |
    key1 = "value", -------- /1/1/1  |       |
    key2 = 123, ------------ /1/1/2  |       |
                                     |       |
  } ---------------------------------+       |
  in record -------------------------- /1/2  |
                                             |
---------------------------------------------+

> 

Author: ```suggestion
\```
```

> # Design implementation of NLS

Reviewer: Design and Implementation

Author: ```suggestion
# Design and Implementation
```

Upon source code changes, a language server may reprocess the code to gather general information, and provide diagnostics.
Since, for this the LSP uses notifications, and language servers generally run as separate processes, delays in processing may not directly affect the programmer.
However, depending on the implementation of the server, multiple changes may queue up preventing the timely response to other requests or delaying diagnostics.

The JSON-RPC protocol underlying the LSP, is a synchronous protocol.
Each request requires that the server responded to the previous request before processing can begin.
Moreover, the order of requests has to be maintained.
Since many requests are issued implicitly by the editor, e.g., hover requests, there is a risk of request queuing which could delay the processing of explicit commands.
It is therefore important to provide nearly instantaneous replies to requests.

It is to mention that the LSP defines "long running" requests, that may run in the background.
This concept mitigates queuing but can lead to similarly bad user experience as responses appear out of order or late.

> ### Capability

Reviewer: Required capabilities

Author: Added action item to change all references

The second objective is to provide an LSP server that offers the most common LSP features as identified by [@langserver-org].
Concretely, these capabilities are:

> 1. Code completion,

Reviewer: one sentence explanation each

Author: https://github.com/ysndr/MSc-Thesis/pull/25/files#r833343477

Being written in the same language as the Nickel interpreter allows NLS to integrate existing components for language analysis.
This way, changes to the Nickel syntax or code analysis impose minimal adaptation of the Language Server.

In fact, using any other language was never considered since that would have required a separate implementation of integral parts of Nickel, which are actively being developed.

Additionally, Rust has proven itself as a language for LSP Servers.
Lastly, Rust has already been employed by multiple LSP servers [@lib.rs#language-servers] which created a rich ecosystem of server abstractions.
For instance the largest and most advaced LSP implementation in Rust -- the Rust Analyzer [@rust-analyzer] -- has contributed many tools such as an LSP server interface [@lsp-server-interface] and a refactoring oriented syntax tree represation [@rowan].
Additionally, lots of smaller languages [@gluon, @slint, @mojom] implement Language Servers in Rust.
Rust appears to be a viable choice even for languages that are not originally implemented in Rust, such as Nix [@nix, @rninx-lsp].

> In Rust the concept of `traits` [@traits] is fundamental, for the following reasons:

Reviewer: replace ", for the following reasons"

Author: ```suggestion
In Rust `traits` [@traits] are the fundamental concept used to abstract methods from the underlying data.  
```

Parts of the nickel runtime, such as the type checker, would need to be adapted or even reimplemented to work incrementally too.
Considering the scope of this thesis, the presented approach performs a complete analysis on every update to the source file.
The typical size of Nickel projects is assumed to remain small for quite some time, giving reasonable performance in practice.
Incremental parsing, type-checking and analysis can still be implemented as a second step in the future after gathering more usage data once nickel and the NLS enjoy greater adoption.

### Code Analysis

Code analysis approaches as introduced in [@sec:considerable-dimensions] can have both *lazy* and *eager* qualities.
Lazy solutions are generally more compatible with an incremental processing model, since these aim to minimizing the change induced computation.
NLS prioritizes to optimize for efficient queries to a pre-processed data model.
Similar to the file processing argument in [@sec:file-pressng], it is assumed that Nickel project's size allows for efficient enoigh eager analysis prioritizing a more straight forward implementation over optimized performance.

## High-Level Architecture

> This section describes The high-level architecture of NLS.

Reviewer: upper case T

Author: ```suggestion
This section describes the high-level architecture of NLS.
```

The entity diagram depicted in [@fig:class-diagram] shows the main elements at play.

NLS needs to meet the flexibility and generalizability requirements as discussed in [@sec:flexibility, @sec:generalizability].
In short three main considerations have to be satisfied:

1. To keep up with the frequent changes to the Nickel language and ensure compatibility at minimal cost, NLS needs to *integrate critical functions* of Nickel's runtime
2. Adaptions to Nickel to accommodate the language server should be minimal not obstruct its development and *maintain performance of the runtime*.
3. To allow the adoption in other languages, the core language server should be separable from the nickel specifics.

The architecture of NLS reflects these goals, using conceptional groups.
The core group labeled "Language Server", contains modules concerning both the source code analysis and LSP interaction.
The analysis is base on an internal representation of source code called `Linearization` which can be in one of two states, namely `Building` or `Completed`.

> Either state manages an array of items (`LinearizationItems`) that are derived from AST nodes as well as various metadata facilitating the actions related to the state.

Author: ```suggestion
Either state manages an array of items (`LinearizationItems`) that are derived from AST nodes as well as various metadata facilitating the actions related to the state.
The `LinearizationItem` is an abstract representation of code units represented by AST nodes or generated to support an AST derived item.
Items associate a certain span with its type, metadata, scope and a unique id, making it referable to.
Additionally, `LinearizationItem`s are assigned a `TermKind` which distinguishes different functions of the item in the context of the linearization.
```

The analysis results are cached internally and used by the individual capability handlers to answer LSP requests.

The Nickel module contains, apart from the parsing and type checking functions, a group of types related to AST nodes and the linearization process.
While these types currently appear throughout the entire architecture, in the future the language server library will use different abstractions to remove this dependency.
[Section @sec:future-work] lays out a more detailed plan how this will be achieved.

\bls
```{.plantuml #fig:class-diagram include=assets/class-diagram.plantuml caption="Entity Diagram showing the architecture of NLS, explicit dependency arrows omitted for legibility."}
```
\els

## Illustrative example

The example [@lst:nickel-complete-example] shows an illustrative high level configuration of a server.
Using Nickel, this file would be used to define the schema of the configuration format of another program.
Evaluation and validation is done in the context of Nickel, after which the evaluated structure is translated into a more common (but less expressive) format such as YAML or JSON.

> Here, the chema for a configuration of a Kubernetes-like [@kubernetes] tool is defined using contracts, making exemplary use of variables and functions.

Reviewer: chema?

Author: ```suggestion
Here, the schema for a configuration of a Kubernetes-like [@kubernetes] tool is defined using contracts, making exemplary use of variables and functions.
```

Throughout this chapter, different sections about the NSL implementation will refer back to this example.

```{.nickel #lst:nickel-complete-example caption="Nickel example with most features shown"}
let Port | doc "A contract for a port number" =
  contracts.from_predicate (fun value =>
    builtins.is_num value &&
    value % 1 == 0 &&
    value >= 0 &&
    value <= 65535) in

let Container = {
  image | Str,
  ports | List Port,
} in

let NobernetesConfig = {
  apiVersion | Str,
  metadata.name | Str,
  replicas | nums.PosNat
           | doc "The number of replicas"
           | default = 1,
  containers | { _ : Container },

} in

let name_ = "myApp" in

let metadata_ = {
    name = name_,
} in

let webContainer = fun image => {
  image = image,
  ports = [ 80, 443 ],
} in

let image = "k8s.gcr.io/%{name_}" in

{
  apiVersion = "1.1.0",
  metadata = metadata_,
  replicas = 3,
  containers = {
    "main container" = webContainer image
  }
} | NobernetesConfig

```

## Linearization

The focus of the NLS as presented in this work is to implement a foundational set of LSP features as described in [@sec:capability].

> In order to process these capabilities efficiently as per [@sec:performance], NLS needs to store more information than what is originally present in a Nickel AST (cf. [@sec:nickel-ast]), such as information about references these can be deduced from the AST lazily, it would require the repeated traversal of arbitrarily large tree with an associated cost to performance.

Reviewer: sentence too long, split

Author: ```suggestion
In order to process these capabilities efficiently as per [@sec:performance], NLS needs to store more information than what is originally present in a Nickel AST (cf. [@sec:nickel-ast]), such as information about references.
Although this can be deduced from the AST lazily, working with Nickel's tree representation is inefficient, as it is not optimized for random access and search operations.
```

However, the exact structure of that array differs as an effect of the post-processing.

`LinearizationItem`s maintain the position of their AST counterpart as well as its type.
Unlike in the AST ([sec:meta-information]), *metadata* is directly associated with the element.
Further deviating from the AST representation, the *type* of the node and its *kind* are tracked separately.
The latter is used to represent a usage graph on top of the linear structure.
It distinguishes between declarations (`let` bindings, function parameters, records) and variable usages.
Any other kind of structure, for instance, primitive values (Strings, numbers, boolean, enumerations), is recorded as `Structure`.

To separate the phases of the elaboration of the linearization in a type-safe way, the implementation is based on type-states[@typestate].
Type-states were chosen over an enumeration based approach for the additional flexibility they provide to build a generic interface.
Thanks to the generic interface, the adaptions to Nickel to integrate NLS are expected to have almost no influence on the runtime performance of the language in an optimized build.

> NLS implements separate type-states for the two phases of the linearization: `Building` and `Completed`.

Author: ```suggestion
NLS defines two type-state variants according to the two phases of the linearization: `Building` and `Completed`.
```

    pub scope: HashMap<Vec<ScopeId>, Vec<ID>>,
}
impl LinearizationState for Building {}
```

```{.rust #lst:nls-definition-completed-type caption="Type Definition of Completed state" }
pub struct Completed {
    pub linearization: Vec<LinearizationItem<Resolved>>,
    scope: HashMap<Vec<ScopeId>, Vec<ID>>,
    id_to_index: HashMap<ID, usize>,
}
impl LinearizationState for Completed {}
```

### Transfer from AST

The NLS project aims to present a transferable architecture that can be adapted for future languages.
Consequently, NLS faces the challenge of satisfying multiple goals

<!-- what is more? -->

To accommodate these goals NLS comprises three different parts as shown in [@fig:nls-nickel-structure].

The `Linearizer` trait 
  ~ acts as an interface between Nickel and the language server.
    NLS implements a `Linearizer` specialized to Nickel which registers AST nodes and builds a final linearization.
Nickel's type checking implementation
  ~ was adapted to pass AST nodes to the `Linearizer`.
    Modifications to Nickel are minimal, comprising only few additional function calls and a slightly extended argument list.
A stub implementation

>   ~ of the `Linearizer` trait is used during normal operation.
>     Since most methods of this implementation are `no-op`s, the compiler should be able to optimize away all `Linearizer` calls in release builds.

Author: ```suggestion
  ~ of the `Linearizer` trait is used during normal operation of the interpreter.
    Since most methods of this implementation are `no-op`s, the compiler is expected to be able to remove most `Linearizer` related method calls in optimized release builds.
    This promises minimal runtime impact incurred by the integration of lsp APIs.
```

These are *metadata*, *usage graph* related nodes, i.e. declarations and usages, *static access* of nested record fields, and *general elements* which is every node that does not fall into one of the prior categories.

##### Structures

```{.nickel #lst:nickel-simple-expr caption="Exemplary nickel expressions"}
// atoms

1
true
null

// binary operations
42 * 3
[ 1, 2, 3 ] @ [ 4, 5]

// if-then-else
if true then "TRUE :)" else "false :("

// string iterpolation
"%{ "hello" } %{ "world" }!"
```

In the most common case of general elements, the node is simply registered as a `LinearizationItem` of kind `Structure`.
This applies for all simple expressions like those exemplified in [@lst:nickel-simple-expr]

##### Declarations

In case of `let` bindings or function arguments name binding is equally simple.
As discussed in [@sec:let-bindings-and-functions] the `let` node may contain both a name and patterns.
For either the linearizer generates `Declaration` items and updates its name register.
However, type information is available for name bindings only, meaning pattern matches remain untyped.

The same process applies for argument names in function declarations.

> Due to argument currying[^https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Currying], NLS linearizes only a single argument/pattern at a time.

Reviewer: avoid ref to wikipedia

Since different types represent the two states, the building state is explicitly transformed into a completed type allowing for additional post-processing (cf. [@sec:post-processing]).
To fully support all actions implemented by the server, the completed linearization provides several methods to access specific items efficiently.
The implementation of these methods is explained in [@sec:resolving-elements].

<!-- TODO mention lsif here? -->

### States

At its core the linearization in either state is represented by an array of `LinearizationItem`s which are derived from AST nodes during the linearization process.
However, the exact structure of that array differs as an effect of the post-processing.

`LinearizationItem`s maintain the position of their AST counterpart as well as its type.
Unlike in the AST ([sec:meta-information]), *metadata* is directly associated with the element.
Further deviating from the AST representation, the *type* of the node and its *kind* are tracked separately.

> The latter is used to represent a usage graph on top of the linear structure.

Author: ```suggestion
```
